Thu Jan 12 10:59:18 MST 2012

What is sociology?
Study of social life, social change, social causes, social consequences, human behavior, etc.

Sociological Imagination - We try to get rid of everything we think we know about a subject before studying it.
  Look at the broader social picture rather than just the individual experiance.
  Cerite Mills. Need to look beyond the individual for source of social problems.
  Takes private trouble and society and connects them.

Individuals, their relation to society, and patterns.
Psychology describes individuals and their actions based on personal motivation.
Sociology works with categories of people and society.

Ted Bundy helped to catch the Green River killer by describing his behavior.

Take a private issue, divorce, abortion, etc.

Divorce
  Issues of divorce:
    Finances, related to the stock market, job market
    Children
    Infidelity

Brief history of sociology:
Sociology is a relatively new field.
late 18th early 19th centuries in Europe. Europe was having troubles with the French revolution. The old midevil social structure based on multi-monarchy was starting to crumble, and people wanted a better life. The religious authority was starting to give way to scientific authority.
The Enlightenment
The Industrial Revolution moved people from the farm to the city.
They had more time to themseves, but conditions in the city were not very good with overcrowding, sanitation, and crime.

The Early theorists (The Neglected Founders)
Sociologists before sociology was called sociology.

1. August Comte (1798-1857) French, coined the term Sociology KNOWTHIS
  Wanted to improve society, wanted peace. Believed that the only wa yto progress society was to study it scientifically. Called sociology a religious sect, the Religion of Humanity.

2. Herriet Martineau (1802-1876)
  First female sociologist. First person to study intimate areas of social life, such as family, children, etc. Considered one of the first feminist social scientists.

3. W.E.B. Dubois (1868-1963)
  African american educator and social activist, 1st African American to get a doctorate at Harvord
  Foucused on race relations, one of the first to do so
  "The problem of the 20th century is the problem of the colorblind."

Fab Four - Classical Sociological Theorists

A. Emile Durkheim (1858-1917)
  1. Wanted sociology to be an academic discipline
  2. Systematic, formal methods & objective data
  3. Study "social facts"
  4. All parts of society function as a whole, like a body
    a. Organic Solidarity
  5. Wrote about the division of labor in society
    a. Effects morals & society
    b. Determines social solidarity
    c. Study on Suicide
      i. Anomie is central to the study
This guy was Jewish at a time at which there was opposition to Jews.
Called "rituals" things that bring social solidarity to a community.
  Public rituals such as church, marriage, public punishment, etc. brings solidarity to the society.
  Two types of solidarity:
    Mechanical solidarity - the type of bond that occurs in pre-industrial, traditional society
    Organic solidarity - occurs in more modern societies, so he's talking about a really high division of labor like we have in our society now, where everybody has different jobs. Our dependence on eachother creates the bonds.
  Social facts - 
  Two forces, social solidarity and social control, is going to influance an individual's decision to commit suicide. Too much or too little of either of these things will increase suicide rate.
  Used statistics to show that different countries had consistant suicide rates.
  Anomie - personal state of isolation and anxiety resulting from a lack of social control and regulation
B. Karl Marx (1818-1883)
  German scholar, PhD in philosophy.
  Bourgeoisie class - owns the means to production, the ruling class
  Proliteriat - the working class
  Class-less society - communism
  1. Concentrates on economic issues
  2. Concentrated on modern changes & capitalism
  3. Interested in the poor vs rich
  4. Capitalism causes conflict, poor want to overcome exploitation by the rich
  5. Thought capitalism would be replaced by a classless society
C. Max Weber (1684-1920)
  1. Interested in values & beliefs
  2. Wrote The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism
  3. Discussed bureaucracies
  4. Characteristics of Bureaucracies
  5. Said bureaucracy would cause routinization which leads to a loss of personal freedom. Individual becomes trapped in an iron cage.
  Versthen - empathy

II. Theory:
  A. Abstract interpretation of how things work.
  B. Used to understand social change
  C. Explanation of social life
  D. Macrosociology & microsociology are examined
    Macrosociology - Study larger things
      Functionalism, conflict theory, rational choise theory
    Microsociology - personal interactions
      Symbolic interactionism
III. Modern Theoretical Approaches
  A. Structural Functionalism
    1. view society as a living organism, and that each part of society serves a vital role in keeping the society going
    2. Parts of society are integrated. One change can affect everything
    3. Parsons says: Society may change but will always return to a stable state
    4. Merton says: not all elements are positive, negative effects cause dysfunction
      a. Dysfunction: abuse in a family, etc.
      b. Also interested in latent & manifestatino functions
      Manifest functions - publicaly acknowledged functions, something that pretty much everyone agrees on
        The manifest function of education is to teach children.
      Latent functions - a hidden function
        Social skills is a latent function of the education system
    Functionalists believe or argue that at least on some level there is a concensus or agreement on things that keep society running smoothly
  B. Conflict Theory
    1. Conflict is inevitable
    2. Social change is desirable
    3. Social order reflects the power of people
    More than one group fighting over a limited amount of resources. There's always one group with power over others. Power is constantly shifting.
    Think of Karl Marx, and the working class and capitalists
  C. Rational Choice Theory
    1. People make choices based on rational decisions
    2. Interaction is an exchange of rewards & costs
    3. Social behavior is an exchange activity
  D. Symbolic Interactionism (micro level)
    1. Developed in the 1960s
    2. Focuses on face to face interactions
    3. Operates on a premise of a cycle of meaning.
    4. People react to the meaning that signs & signals hold

SPSS - Statistical Package for Social Sciences - shitty statistics program

Ethics is not going to be in the book, but will be on the test
Structured interviews
Focus groups
Survay response rates are mucho importante
Suvays are annoying, so they have to give a small gift or other incentive for people who take them
Experiments - 
  Artificial experiments - experiment with control groups etc.
    A specific area of study only applicable to a particular group.

Ethics - Ethics are a system of moral standards
  A system that we would like for everyone to follow.
  Ethics - The set of values, standards, and principles used to determine appropriate and acceptable conduct at all stages of the research process.
  Someone might be a bit too ambitious.

  A. Tuskegee Syphilis Study
    The Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphillis in Negro Males
  B. Milgram Experiment

Extra Credit: Watch the film and note violations of the code of ethics
For an institutional review board
  Must have 5 members
  One member must be a scientist
  One member must not be a scientific person, and must be present all the time
  One member must be a member of the community
  Federaly mandated

Culture is simply people's way of life that is passed down from generation to generation.
I. What is culture?
  A. Part of life
II. Material & Non-Material Culture
  A. Culture consists of all products of society that are created over time & shared.
  B. Non-Material: Knowledge, Beliefs, etc.
    i. Includes patterns of behavior & forms of interaction
    Norms, Values, Beliefs
    Social Norms - Rules of behavior that you follow within your particular culture IMPORTANT
      Norms are so ingrained in our lives that we don't think about them much until someone violates them
        Standing in line is a social norm in America, and no one thinks about it much until people cut in line. Other countries don't really have lines, and simply crowd around and whoever is first is first.
        Social norm dictates not to spit in other people's hands
        Norms change within society over time
        Norms do not dictate everything, so they are not obeyed by all people all the time
        sanctions - A social response to behavior.
        Negative sanctions - a punishment in response to social behavior. This is how society gets people to conform. 
        Positive sanctions - positive social response to behavior intended to encourage the behavior
    Sanctions, 
  C. Material: Clothing, 
    I. Technological achievements included here
    II. Physical items can change the environment
III. Values
  A. Are abstract ideals
  B. Govern our attitudes about things
  C. Values can come into conflict
IV. Norms
  A. Culturally defined rules of conduct
  B. May change over time
V. Norms & Sanctions
  A. Norms usually are just a general framework
  B. If someone contradicts a norm negative sanctions may apply
  C. Sanction
    i. Social control
      1. Informal punishment
        The pervert who touches people inappropriately at work will be known in gossip as a pervert.
      2. Formal punishment
        The pervert will also have a formal mark on his permanent record.
    Eventually people don't need sanctions anymore because they start to think that it's the right thing to do.

Beliefs - shared ideas that we all have about what is true. IMPORTANT
  Widely held beliefs in America
    Freedom, not beating children, women's intuition, etc.
    Some people believe that throwing salt over the left sholder wards off spirits, bad luck, etc.

Values determine what is valuable (lol), and what is morally correct.
  Privacy is highly valued in America. One might think to help a family that is in need, but might be prevented from doing so because one values the other family's privacy.
  Cooperation is valued, but in some situations it can be seen as cheating.

Culture and society are not the same thing IMPORTANT
  Society is a group of people living in a defined territory who are participating in a culture
  culture is a way of life, how people believe, value, and behave. Society's personality.

Culture and Biology
  Instincts - genetically inherited patters of behavior
    members of the same species have similar instincts
  Humans have instincts, but cannot survive on instincts alone.
  Biology says particular men are attracted to a particular type of woman based on an inate trate. Sociology says that if biology is right, then only one type of female wolud be attractive. (holy shit, stupid generalization batman) Really, sociology says women can be attractive based on money or other non-biological things.

VI. Subculture
  A. Has values, behaviors & physical artifacts that distinguish it from a larger culture
  B. Culture within a culture
  C. Values & norms are distinct from the majority
  D. Characteristics:
    i. Different cultural backgrounds
    ii. Different languages
    iii. Different cultural patterns
    iiv. Internalized norms, values & beliefs
  E. Never exist independently from dominant culture
VII. Culture & Society
  A. Very closely connected
  B. Culture teaches us how to conform
VIII. Nature/Nurture debate

There is a custom in sudan to remove lower teeth from everybody without using anything to num the mouth.

Blah blah blah, cultures and stuff. Emos are a cultural subgroup, as were the hippies and the punk rockers.

Amish are an example of cultures that try to retreat from the main of society.
Cults and some religious groups also try to live independantly from the mainstream culture.

Subculture of students at ISU.
  -Bengal Web and crap is part of the ISU subculture

I. 69 Cultural Diversity
  A. What does it mean?
    a. cultures are rarely uniform
    b. the more complex/the more culturally diverse
  B. Subcultures
    a. important aspects of society
    b. has values, behaviors, and physical artifacts that distinguish it from a larger culture
    c. values and norms are distinct from the majority
    d. characteristics/examples of subcultures
      i. different cultural backgrounds
      ii. different languages
      iii. different cultural patterns
      iv. internalized norms, values, and beliefs
    e. can become absorbed in the larger society
    f. never exist independently
    g. assimilation
      Immigrants are a group that often try to assimilate, because they do not want to stand out.

II. Ethnocentrism and Cultural Relativism
  A. Ethnocentrism - when we judge other cultures according to our own standards
    When we study other cultures from the context of our own culture, our views will skew the truth. Sociologists avoid this.
    Social groups think that their way of life is better than the way of life of other social groups.
    Can lead to wars.
  B. Multiculturalism - when we judge others by their own standards
    
III. Cultural Universals
  a. Traits found in all cultures
    Incest is a taboo in most cultures, and is certainly taboo in the United States.
    Bad looks are called sanctions. IMPORTANT
  b. language, family form, guvernment, etc...

IV. Symbols
  A. Something that is chosen to represent something else. IMPORTANT this is silly...
    Object, word, gesture, facial expression, sound.
    Can be observable, or it can be something more abstract.
      National flag is a concrete symbol.
      Abstract symbol can be a smell, like the smell of a home.
    Christian cross can mean to some people:
      sacrifice, generosity, pain, etc.
    To people not Christian, it can be just a design that they like.
    To someone else it can reprent the crusades.
    Burning a cross can represent brotherhood and unity for some people, and hate and agression to others.
  B. Characteristics
    a. usually par of the physical environment
    b. represents ideas to others
    c. can be observable or abstract
    d. has meaning only in specific culture
    e. may cause confusion
    f. changable = sensitive to time and place

V. Language
  A. Foundation of every culture
    a. conveys verbal and non-verbal messages
    b. Language has 3 forms
      i. spoken
        sounds; mouth-words such as "dog"
      ii. written
        allows people to store ideas and share them with future generations
      iii. non-verbal
        body postures, facial expressions
        "scientists" believe that non-verbal expressions carry 90% of the meaning
    c. langugae is our guide to reality.
      It has been suggested that if there is not a word for something, it does not enter into our reality.
      Consider the word "weekend". In America, we think of the week divided into two parts, the work week and the weekend. The week ends on Friday. People party and relax on the weekend.
VI. Globalization
  a. global economy
  b. global communications
  c. migration
  d. links that bring us together
  e. English Language
    The English language is a common language between a lot of cultures, and is the language of business and the Internet.
VII. Theoretical Perspectives on Culture/if there is time.
VIII. End of Class period
  a. short film on culture
  b. address any questions on exam

Victor, wild child who grew up in the wild in the 18th century.

The looking glass self.
  We use the reaction of others towards us as mirrors to determine our own behavior and self worth.

George Herbert Mead - Identity emerges from the roles that one plays. Role taking.
Charles Horton Cooley
Step 1 - Immitation - Immitating the actions that other people take.
Step 2 - Play - Immitation that evolves into a more complicated form.

Coridor curriculum - the stuff that students learn outside of the classroom

Herold Garfingle

Three rules for a breaching experiment.

Submit the person to a breach without the possibility for an explination, to prevent the person from thinking that it is just a game.

The person that is subjected to a breach is forced to reconstruct the facts without the time to do so.

You can't offer them any help or indication that a breach is occuring.

Sit in someone else's seat.

Next exam, chapters 4, 5, and 6.

Social aggregate - 
Social group - A group of people that interact with eachother specifically.
Social category - 

Outgroup - Non-patriotic people, immigrants, jehova witnesses, etc.

Diad - 2 person relationship, must be mutual relationship

Mediate, benefit, or divide.

Labeling theory
  Those who have the power to label either an act or a person who is deviant.

Secondary deviance - deviance that occurs after the person who commits the initial deviance starts thinking of themselves as a deviant

Conflict theory links the deviant people to the lower class

Took 50 years for states to go from most banning interracial marriage to it being uncostitutional to ban it

Uniform crime report. The FBI estimates that in 2010 13.1 million arrests were made in the US for criminal infractions not including traffic violations.

Studies show that people are more likely to report crime when they believe that something can be done about it.

Over 1/2 of asault or robbery isn't reported.

Violent crime was 4% of total crimes.

3.8 million violent victimizations in 2010

A property crime occurs every 3.5 seconds. (wow, what a useless stastistic)
A violent crime occurs every 25.3 seconds.
1 murder every 35 minutes.
1 forced rape every 6 minutes.
1 robbery every minitue.
one agrivated assult every 40 seconds.

studies show that black or latino with no previous criminal record are treated worse in juvinile system

For about 1000 females, about 9 of them will be arrested.

gender contract - women using the stereotype that women are helpless and confused to escape conviction

Idaho has 15 inmates on deathrow

Something about poverty today blah blah blah...

Don't stress out about numbers

IMPORTANT: need to know everything on the crap that she sent us

IMPORTANT: Classes: upper class, middle class, lower middle class, blah blah 7 classes

Poverty in the United States
A. Absolute Poverty means that a person or family simply can't get enough to eat
  1. Common in poorer developing countries
B. Relative Poverty is a measure of inequality
  1. It means being poor compared with the stnandards of living of the majority
  2. It is reasonable to call aperson poor in the United States s/he lacks the basic resources need to maintain a decent standard of housing and healthy living conditions.
C. Measuring Poverty
  1. Programs in the United States have helped to reduce poverty

Need to know this stupid ass number: The Census Bureau's poverty threshdold for 2010 for a four person household: $22,314

Strong factor of poverty is race

Single family households have higher chance of falling under the poverty line

Feminisation of poverty, single parent households headed by women are becoming more common

Single women with less education are more likely to have children out of wedlock

Food secure - Nutritionally adequate and safe food
Food insecure - otherwise

Lots of people were food insecure

IMPORTANT: need to know Table 2, Feeding America Organizations

Idaho Food Bank
Backpack program: children who are in food insecure households get a backpack full of food
Headstart program

Poverty theories:
The poor is responsible for being poor. A lot of people have this view in America.
  -Early child bearing, drug use, laziness, etc.
The children are socialised into poverty, so they don't think that they can escape. This way of thinking is passed down from generation to generation.

More service jobs are appearing, and most of these jobs get filled by women, making women poor and giving men fewer job opportunity.

In order to qualify for assintance in work assistance programs they need to get training or education

Conflict theory, functional theory
Structural functionalist theory

IMPORTANT: focus on the statistics

Know rachel fletcher
Jeff so and so

Theories of stratification
Weber's three dimensions of stratification
  Property,
  Prestige,
  Power,
Social mobility,
   Upward mobility,
   downward mobility,
   exchange theory
Functionalist Theory

